This idea isn't new, but it is worth mentioning:

Channel capacity is given by C = B log_2 (1 + S/N), where S/N is the
signal to noise ratio (SNR) and B is the available bandwidth.

Source: https://www.gaussianwaves.com/2008/04/channel-capacity/

One of the primary goals when improving communications hardware is to
increase the signal to noise ratio. This results in a very limited
increase in channel capacity because such efforts occur within the
logarithm. That's why it's critical to make good use of the available
bandwidth.

The available bandwidth can be used more effectively by:

1. Increasing the quality factor of the communications hardware.
2. Using orthogonal frequencies in order to mathematically
differentiate between communication channels that have overlapping
frequency bands (also known as OFDM).
3. Spacial separation of communication channels in order to avoid
interference and thus allow each channel to use multiple communication
bands.


Spacial separation is often achieved by using Multiple Inputs and
Multiple Outputs (MIMO) in order to create virtual apperatures that
direct signals like a directional antenna, thus reducing a signal's
effect on other nearby communication channels. This technology can
already be found in wifi routers (with multiple antennas), mobile
phone towers and even in the hardware of 5G devices.


When talking about (high density) mesh networks I would like to remind
everyone about how they further increase the spacial separation of
communication channels by allowing data to be sent accross multiple
small hops rather than a single long haul transmissions. Radio waves
follow the inverse square law, thus resulting in large (at best
quadratic) power savings when making many small hops rather than large
hops.  This reduction in transmission power also results in a reduced
physical space consumption of any given communication channel, thus
allowing for more parallel communication channels that use the same
frequency bands and a better use of the available bandwidth.

Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inverse-square_law

The idea:

With the advent of IoT and the widespread adoption of smartphones and
routers, we have a large unused potential of networking
infrastructure. It would make senese to incentivize the use of
existing hardware (smartphones and routers) as communication nodes,
possibly using a blockchain (or distributed ledger/tangle). Rather
than having network failures due to a lack of available bandwidth,
places with a high client(/node) density would have an extremely high
throughput thanks to their high node density which allows for a lot of
parallel channels that have a short hop distance/low transmission
power.

Existing (TCP/IP) infrastructure could be updated to incorporate a
reward for nodes/"miners" that contribute towards delivering packets
on the network. A deflationary reward combined with tips could result
in a race condition where nodes compete to provide the best networking
service on various metrics.


Summary:
The advantages of a decentralized approach are that it has the
potential to save energy and drastically increase throughput with
existing hardware, while ensuring that the networking infrastructure
is always where the demand is (because the consumer is also the
supplier).

EXTENSION: Three dimensional MIMO mesh for decentralized waveform
control

Essentially the advantage of mesh networks so far was that a single
high power isotropic transmission is replaced by a chain of low power
isotropic transmissions in order to promote directionality of
information flow (it is offcourse possible that different carriers and
modulation schemes are used at different stages in this chain of
communication).

Now I would like to add another aspect: decentralized wave form shaping

MIMO is used to achieve directional waveforms. In the context of the
aforementioned ''chain'' of mesh networking nodes, this would allow
for larger distances between nodes and a more robust mesh network with
less interference between nodes that are not directly in the path of
communication.

Such MIMO ''modules'' have some limitations though:

* The directionality of the modules doesn't increase liniearly with
  the number of antennas that it uses.
* The spacial distance between a module's antennas is limited by it's
  size or the size of it's package.

These two problems could be addressed by splitting up the antennas
from a single MIMO node accross multiple individual modules that are
spacially distributed accross three dimensions and cooperate with
eachother in order to produce an improved (more directional) waveform
between the information source and it's destination.

Using such modules to modify the waveform inbetween the information
source and the destination of the information could eliminate the need
for complex ''MIMO nodes'' that are capable of communicating with
eachother. Instead it could be sufficient for modules inbetween the
source and destination to contribute to the shaping of the waveform,
thus improving directionality of the communication channel without
actually ''handeling'' the data.

The modules inbetween could again be reembursed for their services
using a blockchain (or distributed ledger).

Some local radio measurements and experimental trials between
neighbouring modules would be required at regular intervals in order
to quantify the productivity of a module's contribution towards the
desired waveform and to reevaluate the module's activity on the
respective communication channel.

This concept should also be compattible with OFDM communication -
provided that the modules have sufficient processing power to separate
the channels, decide what action to take and then compute an IFFT in
order to transmit an appropriate signal in real time. This offcourse
also implies that a module can simultaneously help shape the wave
forms of multiple communication channels, even if the channels
propagate in different directions spacially.

The high directionality thanks to the 3D spacial freedom that is
propposed above, this concept kind of concept could also be of value
in in wireless power transfer applications.